This video is brought to you by skill share an online learning community where
millions come together to take the next step in their creative journey.
Thousands of classes on lots of topics, more on them in a bit,
For as long as mankind has had currency,
a system rating and a market economy.
The world has been split into the haves and the have nots.
And for much of that time, there's been a huge gap between the two,
the idea of the 1%, isn't a new concept by any means.
And in order to talk about one of the richest men in history,
we'll have to go all the way back to the 15th century.
Annie would become known as Yakob fogger.
The rich was born in 1459 and he had an advantage that few people
get then, or now he was born into a well to do family,
but through a series of investments made with incredible foresight and
willingness to risk it,
all fogger guided his family to become one of the richest ands most influential
in history. Here is how he did it.
Since we're going to be talking about yak of fogger in the context of his
wealth,
it's worth investigating just how rich he really was perspective is key after
all.
So let's compare his fortune to that of people who might be a little bit more
familiar take bill gates, his highest net worth. It's a seriously impressive,
144 billion.
Although he gives so much money away through his foundation that that's not
really an accurate picture. Go back in time, about 200 years.
And then we have John Jacob Cabasta.
He has the honor of being America's first multi-millionaire that he controlled
much of the third in the early 19th century. And when he died,
he was worth what would be around 168 billion in today's money.
Henry Ford tips, the scales at around 200 billion in today's money,
which puts him right alongside names like Cornelius, Vanderbilt,
and mu Mar Affy Rockefeller and Carnegie comes somewhere in the middle of the
300 billion fogger. Well, it was richer than all of them.
There's a few different ways.
You can look at wealth and given the fast changing modern economy,
plus factoring in inflation,
a simple numerical comparison doesn't really carry that much weight.
It's estimated that in today's us currency fogger would have a net worth of
somewhere around $400 billion,
but there's a lot more or to it than that consider forger in a grand
context. If you took Europe's entire economic output at the time he owned
2.2% of that. If that doesn't sound like much,
remember we are talking about representing more than two percents of an entire
continents,
economic for reference examine John D AE Fell's value when he died in
1937,
and he only owned 1.5% of America's gross domestic products.
And that's just one country. But before you get bod down by dollar signs,
don't forget. We aren't just talking about the value of money.
Foggo wield did a great deal of power and influence,
and that can be the most valuable currency of all
Yakob.
The Ridge may have been the economic sevans who catapulted the family fortune to
newfound Heights, but the Foggo fortune was built on the shoulders of one. Man.
There are a few others in the family that deserve an honorable mention.
Jacob's grandfather hungs was born into a peasant family in Southern Germany by
1367. He had moved to Augsburg and made a few wise choices in the game of love.
He married twice and both of his wives were the daughters of masters in the
weavers Guild. That's not to, he was a master Weaver himself though.
Hans didn't weave at all.
What he did do was act as the middle man providing raw materials for those who
performed the manual labor later,
he would buy the finished textiles and sell them for a massive profit.
From there, he moved up in the guilt himself,
earning a spot on the committee and eventually serving on the great council of
Oberg. Hans died in 40 0 8, but he, he didn't pass the business onto his sons.
Instead his wife,
Elizabeth took over the reins and spent the next 28 years using our own business
savvy to continue growing the family's wealth.
Hans had two sons of note Andreas,
and YAB the first and eventually they made their own fortunes and contributed to
the families.
They were Goldsmiths and they worked together in till disagreements led to a
split in 1454, even though Andreas had more immediate success,
that branch of the family was bankrupt by 1499.
ABA on the other hand,
increased his wealth than standing slowly but surely he married the daughter of
a men's master and they raised seven sons all while he grew his status.
As a member of city's merchants Guild,
two of his sons were groomed to take over the financial side of the business.
The youngest YAB the seconds, our future Yakob,
the rich was like many youngest sons were on his way to being educated
for a place in the clergy YAB but also known as YAB.
The elder died in 1469 for the next 28 years.
Once the business affairs weren't in the hands of any of the sons,
but were managed by the deceased's wife, Barbara Bassinger,
she spent nearly three decades buying and selling.
And when it came time to hand over control to the next generation,
the family was already quite wealthy.
It was Barbara who sent a youngest son off, not just to ecclesiastic studies,
but learned banking and bookkeeping as well. Yak of thei was just a teenager.
When he was sent off to Venice to learn the ins and outs of commerce in a major
European city. By the time he came back,
he had learned skills that would serve him. Well,
he studied not just the principles of trading and commerce,
but he also learned how to read, write, and speak multiple languages.
He also mastered more obscure things like the formulas,
making conversions between various weights measures and currencies.
And then there was accounting. The idea is common enough today,
but at the time German merchants or relied heavily on a haphazard system of
receipts organization was rarely included as a part of a German merchants job
description, but things were quite different in Italy there,
they had developed extensive systems of bookkeeping and accounting procedure
that made it possible to stay on top of multinational companies and trade that
spans the length of the silk road.
Yer was going to need to know how to do all of it.
But just before we get to him learning that I want to take a moment to tell you
about today's fantastic sponsor Skillshare. Indeed,
if you want to learn bookkeeping, the modern type,
not the type that will help you run a company on the silk road.
Skillshare have got you covered with their original course.
Bookkeeping for freelancers.
Skillshare is an online learning community where millions come together to take
the next step in their creative journey skills share offers membership with
meaning.
They've got thousands of classes for creative and curious people on topics from
illustration to design, to photography, to video, to freelance.
And that is just scratching the surface sculpture office classes designed for
real life.
So you can move your creative journey forward without putting life on hold.
No one likes being put on hold.
Unlike some websites where you have to pay for individual courses,
there's none of that with skill share,
you just get a premium membership and then you can get unlimited access.
So you can take as many courses as you want.
I've previously mentioned some of the classes I've taken,
but maybe are into different things than me.
I they've got classes on interior design by Henderson,
something I don't know anything about, but I imagine my wife would like,
they've got courses on Instagram photography,
cuz that's the thing now and also how to make digital posters. So look,
you can get two months of premium membership for free,
just click below and explore your creativity. After that,
it's just $10 a month for an annual subscription. Let's get back to it.
It was several years before yakka returned to Germany.
And by that time his older brother had already set up a firm of their own.
It was called UG and brothers and yakka started out with a
29% ownership stake.
He wasn't working with them belong when he witnessed a deal that made a lasting
impact on him and taught him a very important lesson about the makings of a king
or Rick Fuga was approached by the Hapsburg emperor Frederick II.
He was installed as holy Roman emperor in 1452 and his reign was both
turbulence and historically significant.
He dealt with a series of revolt and revolution as well as continued unrest on
the Eastern border of his kingdom.
He was on the front lines of the long running battle between the Ottoman am
empire and Christie and Europe maintaining a firm relationship with the church,
but struggling to consolidate his territory into a unified power.
One of the most important things he's still known for isn't necessarily what he
did, but what he laid the grounds were in 1477,
he made a deal to join his family with the duke of burgundies of either marriage
of his son,
to the daughter of Charles bold before the marriage could be agreed upon though,
Frederick needed to impress the Burgundians to prove his family's worthiness
with coffers running dry.
He turned to the FOS Frederick II found himself in di need to find textiles.
And that was precisely what the fogger family did best yakka watched.
As his older brother made the deal. He would give the holy Roman emperor,
the fine silks and will he needed to impress Charles,
but he wanted something in return.
This was a coat of arms bestowed upon all of the fo brothers.
It doesn't sound like much, but for the family,
it was a huge deal that allowed them to rise from just being well todo members
of the merchant class to being a bonified family of standing and
clout. It was a win-win.
The deal also helped Frederick to close on the marriage,
which in turn consolidated power and made Austria a force to be reckoned with
from all of this YAB learns that even Kings would bend to the knee before money.
Every haggle might come with some natural give or take,
but a careful negotiation could have a very far reaching outcome. Indeed.
In 1485, YAB made his first solo.
The 26 year old was still working for his brothers when headed off toz Austria
with a desire to break into the mining industry.
His brothers had given him full authority to make any business decisions he
deemed appropriate,
which turned down to be one of the better decisions that the family made YAB met
with. Sigmans the aunt duke of Austria and ruler of roll prior to his,
of these particular titles. Sigmans was a ward of his cousin.
The a mentioned emperor Frederick III when he was given Regency over to and
several other territories,
he was handed incredibly valuable lands rich with silver mines.
And while Sigmans may have been instrumental in promoting and growing his
country's mining industry,
he also liked to spends money as fast as it was being mines.
His love of extravagance sent him the apathetic rich coin,
but he wasn't always able to keep up with his spending.
And this is where Yakup fogger enters the picture.
He had the extra cash that Sigman so desperately needed.
So they struck an intriguing deal. Yakup agreed to lend the orange Jew, okay.
Sizable sun. And in return, the figures would gain the rights to the areas,
silver minds,
money up front in return for the possibility of money in the future teams like a
brilliant trade.
So Sigman took it in exchange for a thousand pounds of silver delivered over
several installments. He did in fact, deliver the mind silver as promised,
which wasn't always a guarantee there's an large Juy could have of just
leveraged his own power and standing to decide he wasn't going to bother with
repayments.
Fortunately for the foggers the delivery came in right on time and Yaka was able
to sell that same silver in Venice at a 50% markup.
And that's what we call good business.
The fogger fortune didn't come from that thousand pounds of silver,
but that first deal did something else cemented a relationship between the
Hapsburg dynasty and the fogger banking em empire,
because just four years later,
Siman found himself in dire need of more help.
This time his trouble started with the outbreak of a border dispute between
Innsbrook and Venice, frankly,
calling it a border dispute is putting it rather mildly.
After noticing that the Venetian military was occupied in a fight with Turkish
forces in Greece, Seaman's launched a modest opportunist attack,
claiming a small Alpine town and extending the Austrian borders.
It probably goes without saying that Venice wasn't terribly happy about this.
They issued theirs sponsor in no uncertain terms.
Sigmans could either return the town and pay a hundred thousand Florence in
restitution for his bravado,
or he could prepare for VES to take back their town by force Sigman appealed to
the family's regular financers,
but no one was willing to lend him the money they refused,
not because of his military action,
but because he had already managed to run up massive debts that he hadn't yet
repaid desperate.
He returned to Yakup fogger where other bankers saw a risk Yakup saw an
opportunity. He agreed to lend Sigmans the money he needed,
but the interest on the deal was going to be massive.
The contract stated that the loan was going to be repaid with more S silver from
Sigmans minds.
All output was to be sold to the foggers at an almost unthinkable discount until
the loan was repaid. The focus could then turn around and sell that silver.
And they stood to make what could safely be described as boatloads of cash,
the deal wasn't without risks,
cisman had already proven that he couldn't repay his regular bankers.
And that was the very real possibility.
He would simply stop sending silver to the focus,
but Yerba banked on the fact that this was a bridges didn't want to burn
gambling,
that he would uphold his end of the deal in order to preserve the possibility of
future partnerships.
It was a little bit about honor ands a lot about knowing he would need to borrow
money again in the future. And it all came up rather shiny for YAB so shiny.
In fact that the fogs opens their first branch office into roll.
And it it's important to stress that this was a gamble on more than just C's
ability or desire to uphold his end.
The bargain metal allergy had been a work in progress for thousands of years.
The evolution of the ages of men are defined by advancements in the use of
materials like bronze and iron.
After all at the time YAB was making deals for silver,
but the corresponding smelting technologies had stalled starting around 1480
though. Met allergic advancements began happening in leaps and bounds.
It was becoming much more economical to separate silver from other materials in
turn the demand for silver bled,
mercury and copper exploded Portugal in particular was buying huge amounts of
copper for their ships and their weapons.
And the figures were well positioned to capitalize on it all in 1494,
Jacob formed the family's first public company, a mining consortium.
His goal was a copper monopoly to get there.
He started investing heavily in copper mining,
buying everything from mines to smelting plants across present day Slovakia.
It's impossible to tell just how massive this portion of their industry was.
As they were incredibly secretive. When it came to the technology, they,
the numbers they saw floating across their accounts.
We do know that it wasn't long before they had built up a massive trading empire
that stretched from England to India and Africa.
It was an industry that sustains the family wealth well into the 16th century
In 1491, Yakima made another wise decision,
the organized alone to Maximilian the first,
the son of Frederick II when Maximilian became a ruler in his own right after
his father's death in 1493,
that cemented yaks continued standing as a banker to powerful and not so rich
men of the 15th and 16th centuries that alongside the a mentioned investments
into a burgeoning mining industry meant that the Foggo family coffers were
filling fast. Still yak was always on the lookout for the next big deal.
The trades came in faster and faster by 1503,
they'd got an into the lucrative spice straight, only five years later,
they were leasing in Roman among the coins.
They were in charge of minting with those, for the Vatican.
They kept that particular little side business until 1524.
And here's where it's worth mentioning one endeavor in particular in
15 14,
1 of the most powerful positions in the church and in the political world became
available. It was for the Archbishop of Maines,
a high ranking position in Germany only to the emperor himself.
The Pope at the time was Leo. The 10th,
the malware name might not sound particularly familiar.
His birth name will Giovanni deci.
His reign as Pope is still known as one of the most extravagant.
He was known as a patron of the arts.
Since that's putting it politely elected to the papacy in 1530,
at 37 years of age,
he made it his mission to elevate the Vatican into something divine.
In order to collect the enormous sum of money he needed to renovate the holy
city. He started doing some shady things that most about Catholics.
Absolutely didn't agree with like selling holy positions within the church.
The position of Archbishop of Maines was one that was up for sale.
And anyone who wanted to buy away into the seat was going to have to pay up how
much well adjusted for inflation.
It would cost the equivalent of about 4.8 million in today's money.
It was alre of H who was determined to have it.
And he turns Deak forgo for financing. YAB agreed.
And he deposited the money right into the boats person or bank accounts.
And well, I guess you can at least bar the openness of it all.
Albach got the position, but now he had a hefty loan that he needed to repay.
And how on earth was he gonna do that? Well, like most of Jacob's deals,
it was complicated.
And there were a few players in place with the support of the pube.
Albrecht started selling indulgences or get out of jail free cards for heaven.
The idea was that anyone willing to make a sizable donation to the church would
have their sins immediately erased and their way into heaven paved.
Presumably with the silver ends copper from ya's minds,
perhaps to make the tale even more believable.
The church arranged for the sale of indulgences while claiming all the money was
paying for some much needed work on some Peter's Basilica. In reality,
half of the money went to the, the pops, the rest went ya.
There were some major consequences though.
Deep sale of indulgences were so unthinkable to some Catholics that they decided
it was worth breaking from the church over Martin Luther's 95 thesis were kick
started by outer age, over the selling of indulgences.
Eventually leading to the Protestant reformation.
That sequence of events is pretty much a perfect example of Yakup fog's
influence. He may not be a name that everyone recognizes in the 21st century,
but thanks to his financial support of powerful Kings and clergymen across
Europe, he completely rewrote world history,
Yakob foggers wheelings and dealings. Aren't too many to list.
So perhaps a better way to talk about the lasting impact he had on the world.
Isn't to talk about how much money he made, but rather how he spent it.
Let's take the fogger eye in 15, 17, YAB oversaw.
The grounds breaking of would be a global first after years spent a massing,
a fortune larger than a single person could spend in our lifetime. ER,
wanted to give back to the community to that end.
He built a housing complex school. The fogi it's located in Augsburg Germany,
and it's entirely accurate to describe it as a city within a city opens in 1520,
it was designed to provide housing to low income tenants.
It included 147 apartments, 67 houses and a church.
Those who lived there back to apply and meet specific criteria,
that to prove their devotion to the Roman Catholic faith have no outstanding
debt,
be struggling to make ends meet and to have lived in Bavaria for two years.
And what were the bonuses? Well,
rent was just 88 cents a year and three present day. That's impressive,
but what's more impressive is that 500 years later,
the fogi still welcomes tenants who are in need and the rent has remained
absolutely unchanged.
The effects that yak of fogger and indeed the fogger family had on the world is
impossible to trace and that some things that we only have time to mention in
tidbit form after Maxima Julian's death in 15,
19 yak of support of Spain's Charles,
I first led to the Hapsburg ruler becoming the holy Roman emperor,
Charles I fifth Yakup also loaned a large sum of money,
fer and Magellan who took that money and set off on his famous expedition to,
I can navigate the globe,
even set up a new service in which he was sent letters from around the world,
updating him,
him on the economic and political situation in all his areas of interest.
Essentially it was a newspaper before the newspapers were even a thing.
The ends of the fo family came gradually in 15,
12 yakka brought four of his nephews on board.
He had no children of his own and he needed someone to pass the business onto
it. Wasn't until 1525, that yak of the rich world,
everything to his you an on with the stipulation that a brethren cousin would be
kept on to advise him YAB died that same year while unrest swept across Hungary,
still the business continued to grow and the firm reached its peak in 1546.
They continued to establish charitable organizations like a foundation for the
treatment of smallpox.
But the very thing that had allowed YAB to become one of the richest men in the
world was the same thing that led to the families downfall.
They were so closely tied to the Hapsburgs and the fortunes of Hungary that as
trade worsened.
So did the family's financial opportunities by 1552 years after their withdrawal
from the Hungarian trade market,
Anton fogger told his sons to focus on their education and find their own
fortunes. In the courts of Europe,
their Spanish branch was bankrupt by 1557 and after Anton's death in
1560 other branches that had become unprofitable were sold leases on mines,
were it? And the family withdrew from Spain and in 1658,
the firm was dissolved completely. It may have been the end of a dynasty,
but the fogger family influence has lasted much longer than their fortune.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below. Don't forget to subscribe.
Also check it off. Fantastic sponsors skills show.
I'm a link to them below and thank you for what Chan.